[docs][pipes] Subprocess section (#17108)
dagster-io/dagster: docs/content/guides/dagster-pipes/subprocess/modify-external-code.mdx

---
title: "Using Dagster Pipes, Part two: Modify external code | Dagster Docs"
description: "With Dagster Pipes, you can incorporate existing code into Dagster without huge refactors. This guide shows you how to modify existing code to work with Dagster Pipes."
---

# Modify external code to send information back to Dagster via Dagster Pipes

<Note>

This is part two of the [Dagster Pipes + subprocess](/guides/dagster-pipes/subprocess) tutorial.

</Note>

At this point, you should have two files:

- `external_code.py` which is a standalone Python script that you want to orchestrate with Dagster.

> - `dagster_subprocess_pipes.py` which includes a Dagster asset and a Dagster definitions.

Author: yeah i noticed that too. i think "other" works!

In this section, you'll learn how to modify the standalone Python script to work with [Dagster Pipes](/guides/dagster-pipes) in order to stream information back to Dagster. To do this, you'll:

- [Make Dagster context available in external code](#step-1-make-dagster-context-available-in-external-code)
- [Stream log messages back to Dagster](#step-2-send-log-messages-to-dagster)
- [Stream structured metadata back to Dagster](#step-3-send-structured-metadata-to-dagster)

---

## Step 1: Make Dagster context available in external code

Getting external code to send information back to Dagster via Dagster Pipes requires adding a few lines of code:

- Imports from `dagster-pipes`

> - A call that connects to Dagster Pipes: <PyObject module="dagster_pipes" object="open_dagster_pipes"/> initializes the Dagster Pipes context that can be used to stream information back to Dagster. We recommend calling this function near the entry point of a pipes session.
> 
>   - The <code>with open_dagster_pipes():</code> is a context manager in Python, ensuring resource setup and cleanup for a specific segment of code. It's useful for tasks requiring initial setup and final teardown, like opening and closing connections. In this case, the context manager is used to initialize and close the Dagster Pipes connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A call that connects to Dagster Pipes: <PyObject module="dagster_pipes" object="open_dagster_pipes"/> initializes the Dagster Pipes context that can be used to stream information back to Dagster. We recommend calling this function near the entry point of a pipes session.

   The <code>with open_dagster_pipes():</code> is a context manager in Python, ensuring resource setup and cleanup for a specific segment of code. It's useful for tasks requiring initial setup and final teardown, like opening and closing connections. In this case, the context manager is used to initialize and close the Dagster Pipes connection.
```

Suggesting we remove the bullet, just for formatting purposes. It'll still be indented, but the line spacing will be the same between paragraphs. Right now it looks kinda funky.

>   The <code>with open_dagster_pipes():</code> is a context manager in Python, ensuring resource setup and cleanup for a specific segment of code. It's useful for tasks requiring initial setup and final teardown, like opening and closing connections. In this case, the context manager is used to initialize and close the Dagster Pipes connection.

Author: i switched the order. i made it a callout because i thought it was an explanation to the python-specific knowledge "context manager" not pipes specific. the reason im explaining it is certain stakeholder audience may not be familiar with the usage of context manager.

    total_orders = len(orders_df)
    # get the Dagster Pipes context
    context = PipesContext.get()
    print(f"processing total {total_orders} orders")

if __name__ == "__main__":
    # connect to Dagster Pipes
    with open_dagster_pipes():
        main()
```

---

## Step 2: Send log messages to Dagster

Dagster Pipes context offers a built-in logging capability that enables you to stream log messages back to Dagster. Instead of printing to the standard output, you can use the `context.log` method on <PyObject module="dagster_pipes" object="PipesContext" /> to send log messages back to Dagster.

```python file=/guides/dagster/dagster_pipes/subprocess/external_code_with_logs.py
import pandas as pd
from dagster_pipes import PipesContext, open_dagster_pipes

def main():
    orders_df = pd.DataFrame({"order_id": [1, 2], "item_id": [432, 878]})
    total_orders = len(orders_df)
    # get the Dagster Pipes context
    context = PipesContext.get()
    context.info.log(f"processing total {total_orders} orders")

if __name__ == "__main__":
    # connect to Dagster Pipes
    with open_dagster_pipes():
        main()
```

> Then, the log messages will show up in the Dagster UI. You can filter the log levels to only view `info` level messages:

Reviewer: Kind of a nit - this assumes the user is still on the Runs page. Mind saying it explicitly here? Ex:

> Then, the log messages will show up in the **Run details** page of the Dagster UI.

Reviewer: One more thing - users can specify any level of log here, right? Right now this reads like it's only possible to have `info` logs.

1. Click the **Levels** filter next to the log filter field. This will present a dropdown of all log levels.
2. Select the **info** checkbox and deselect the others. This will show only the logs marked as **info** level.

<Image
  alt="Send log messages to Dagster"
  src="/images/guides/dagster-pipes/modifying-code-4-log-messages.png"
  width={1326}
  height={742}
/>

> ## Step 3: Send structured metadata to Dagster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---

## Step 3: Send structured metadata to Dagster
```

> Sometimes, you may want to log information from your external code to be structured metadata shown in the Dagster UI. Dagster Pipes context also comes the ability to log structured metadata back to Dagster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes, you may want to log information from your external code as structured metadata shown in the Dagster UI. Dagster Pipes context also comes with the ability to log structured metadata back to Dagster.
```

#### Report asset materialization

Similar to [reporting materialization metadata within the Dagster process](/concepts/assets/software-defined-assets#recording-materialization-metadata), you can also report asset materialization back to Dagster from the external process.

In this example, we’re passing a piece of metadata named `total_orders` to the `metadata` parameter of the <PyObject module="dagster_pipes" object="PipesContext" method="report_asset_materialization" />. This payload will be sent from the external process back to Dagster:

```python file=/guides/dagster/dagster_pipes/subprocess/external_code_with_events.py startafter=start_events_marker endbefore=end_events_marker dedent=4
# get the Dagster Pipes context
context = PipesContext.get()
# send structured metadata back to Dagster
context.report_asset_materialization(metadata={"total_orders": total_orders})
```

> Then, total_orders will show up in the UI as structured metadata:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, `total_orders` will show up in the UI as structured metadata:
```

<Image
  alt="Report asset materialization to Dagster"
  src="/images/guides/dagster-pipes/modifying-code-5-1-report-asset-materialization.png"
  width={1412}
  height={806}
/>

> This metadata will also be displayed on the Events tab of the Asset Details page in the UI:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This metadata will also be displayed on the **Events** tab of the **Asset Details** page in the UI:
```

alt="View materialization events in asset details page"
src="/images/guides/dagster-pipes/modifying-code-5-2-materialization-asset-details.png"
width={1286}
height={736}
/>

#### Report asset checks

> Dagster allows you to define and execute data quality checks on assets. Refer to the [Asset Checks](/concepts/assets/asset-checks) documentation for more information.

Reviewer 2: The `@asset` needs to have an `AssetCheckSpec` attached to it in order to report asset checks. This is referenced with "If your asset has data quality checks defined," but doesn't give much direction as to how to add them. I imagine that's because adding the asset check is something that would be done by whoever is responsible for part 1 of the tutorial, and not the stakeholder persona for this part. 

Should the AssetCheckSpec get added into the "create subprocess asset" tutorial part so that the code snippet added here works?

I'm also struggling to figure out exactly how to add the asset check spec to the `@asset` just doing this, like in the completed snippet at the bottom of the page
```python
@asset(
    check_specs=[AssetCheckSpec("no_empty_order_check", asset="subprocess_asset")]
def subprocess_asset():
    ....
)
```
results in 
```
DagsterInvariantViolationError: Expected Tuple annotation for multiple outputs, but received non-tuple annotation.
```

Author: updated the format to include dagster_code but this also seems to be a separate issue with the return type - will follow up on a later PR!

Dagster allows you to define and execute data quality checks on assets. Refer to the [Asset Checks](/concepts/assets/asset-checks) documentation for more information.

If your asset has data quality checks defined, you can report to Dagster that an asset check has been performed via <PyObject module="dagster_pipes" object="PipesContext" method="report_asset_check" />:

```python file=/guides/dagster/dagster_pipes/subprocess/external_code_with_events.py startafter=start_checks_marker endbefore=end_checks_marker dedent=4
# report data quality check result back to Dagster
context.report_asset_check(
    passed=orders_df[["item_id"]].notnull().all().bool(),
    check_name="no_empty_order_check",
)
```

When Dagster executes the code, you’ll see an asset check event with the check result in the UI:

<Image
  alt="Report asset checks to Dagster"
  src="/images/guides/dagster-pipes/modifying-code-5-3-report-asset-checks.png"
  width={1312}
  height={734}
/>

> This check result will also be displayed on the Checks tab of the Asset Details page in the UI:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This check result will also be displayed on the **Checks** tab of the **Asset Details** page in the UI:
```

<Image
  alt="View checks in asset details page"
  src="/images/guides/dagster-pipes/modifying-code-5-4-checks-asset-details.png"
  width={1302}
  height={730}
/>

---

> At this point, your two files should look like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Finished code

At this point, your two files should look like the following:
```

I think this part could use a heading - not tied to this one specifically though

<TabGroup>

> <TabItem name="Dagster code in `dagster_subprocess_pipes.py`">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<TabItem name="Dagster code in dagster_subprocess_pipes.py">
```

```python file=/guides/dagster/dagster_pipes/subprocess/dagster_subprocess_pipes_finished.py
import shutil

from dagster import (
    AssetCheckSpec,
    AssetExecutionContext,
    Definitions,
    MaterializeResult,
    PipesSubprocessClient,
    asset,
    file_relative_path,
)

@asset(

>     check_specs=[AssetCheckSpec(name="no_empty_order_check", asset="my_asset")],

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    check_specs=[AssetCheckSpec(name="no_empty_order_check", asset="subprocess_asset")],
```

)
def subprocess_asset(
    context: AssetExecutionContext, pipes_subprocess_client: PipesSubprocessClient
) -> MaterializeResult:
    cmd = [shutil.which("python"), file_relative_path(__file__, "external_code.py")]
    return pipes_subprocess_client.run(
        command=cmd, context=context
    ).get_materialize_result()

defs = Definitions(
    assets=[subprocess_asset],
    resources={"pipes_subprocess_client": PipesSubprocessClient()},
)
```

</TabItem>

> <TabItem name="External code in `external_code.py`">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<TabItem name="External code in external_code.py">
```

```python file=/guides/dagster/dagster_pipes/subprocess/external_code_finished.py
import pandas as pd
from dagster_pipes import PipesContext, open_dagster_pipes

def main():
    orders_df = pd.DataFrame({"order_id": [1, 2], "item_id": [432, 878]})
    total_orders = len(orders_df)
    # get the Dagster Pipes context
    context = PipesContext.get()
    # send structured metadata back to Dagster
    context.report_asset_materialization(metadata={"total_orders": total_orders})
    # report data quality check result back to Dagster
    context.report_asset_check(
        passed=orders_df[["item_id"]].notnull().all().bool(),
        check_name="no_empty_order_check",
    )

if __name__ == "__main__":
    # connect to Dagster Pipes
    with open_dagster_pipes():
        main()
```

</TabItem>
</TabGroup>

---

## What's next?

> Now, you've learned how to get access to Dagster Pipes context, report log messages events from the external process, and structured events back to Dagster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, you've learned how to get access to Dagster Pipes context, report log messages events from the external process, and send structured events back to Dagster.
```

> Now, you've learned how to get access to Dagster Pipes context, report log messages events from the external process, and send structured events back to Dagster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you learned how to get access to Dagster Pipes context, report log messages events from the external process, and send structured events back to Dagster.
```

Phrasing - the current sentence sounded a bit odd/unfinished

What's next? From here, you can:

> - Learn about other capabilities of executing external code in subprocess via Dagster Pipes in the [Reference](/guides/dagster-pipes/subprocess/reference) section
> - Learn about [other integrations with Dagster Pipes](/guides/dagster-pipes#usage).
> - Learn how to [customize your own Dagster Pipes protocols](/guides/dagster-pipes/customizing-dagster-pipes-protocols).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Learn about other capabilities of executing external code in subprocess via Dagster Pipes in the [Subprocess reference](/guides/dagster-pipes/subprocess/reference)
- Learn about [other integrations with Dagster Pipes](/guides/dagster-pipes#usage)
- Learn how to [customize your own Dagster Pipes protocols](/guides/dagster-pipes/customizing-dagster-pipes-protocols)
```

Removing punctuation for consistency
